Yeah, and I think you've already shared about what's going to happen.
Roughly, I've just told her what kind of question and what would, yeah.
Easy enough. So yeah, so I'll ask the questions and then by all means you can translate.
So we'll just ask all the questions.
So first things, can you just tell us your name, where you were born and when you were born?
My name is...
I'm a Punjabi, just like you.
Where I was born, when I was born.
She can say it in English, but more not being very confident.
Which is fine, I'm happy with that anyway.
My name is Zebun Nisah. I was born in Pakistan, in Faisalabad.
My name is Zebun Nisah. I was born in Faisalabad, Pakistan. When was I born?
1960.
Can you tell us about what you remember on growing up and your childhood?
When I was a child, I was told about my childhood.
My father was in the army.
After two years of being transferred, he had a very good childhood.
So she said my childhood was very nice. Her father was in the army.
Every two years, he was transferred to different cities and different places.
It was a nice childhood.
Very nice, very good.
We were middle class, but...
It's okay.
She can actually do it.
When she gets stuck, I'll just help.
She can't speak Urdu.
I used to do that.
If there's any problem, she can do it.
My name is Zebun Nisah Ahmad.
Before, my name was Zebun Nisah Hanif.
My father's name is Hanif.
I was born in Pakistan in 1960.
My childhood was very, very good.
Very nice. We had a very big family.
All the cousins played together.
We lived in one house.
Nice.
What was it like being in different parts of the cities?
We don't go to many different cities.
When we had holidays, I would go to my grandmother's village.
No, not city, village.
It's very nice. Very nice.
When you were in Paris, you used to go to different places.
How was it like in different cities?
I don't remember much.
When I went to school, it was very nice.
The first couple of weeks were no good.
We couldn't adjust to different cities.
But after I was 10 years old, my father...
He didn't do the job.
They used to stay in Valle, but he would travel for his job.
Because we all go to school.
In the middle of the year, they were missing school and school admissions.
That's why he started traveling, but they settled in as a family.
What was your favorite memory?
The most.
A lot of memories are very good.
But the happiest memory is when my father left the job and we lived together.
Nice, good, I can't remember any.
I was with my friends' family.
Also, being one daughter with four brothers and the only daughter.
Any games as well?
Yes, in our culture, it's like pithu garam.
We just put the blocks on the top and throw them with the ball.
I love games.
When did you move to the UK?
In 1979, October 7th.
How old were you as well?
I was 18.
What made you come over to the UK?
I got married.
Just engagement. I married in Newport.
And you came straight to Newport?
Yes, straight to Newport.
What was your expectations of the UK?
I think everyone is very rich in here.
No money problem, nothing.
But everything is different when I came.
Nice, the first day, it was very nice.
Lights, clean, everything has changed, but very nice.
But still I left my parents, my friends, my brothers.
Very sad. I cried all 12 hours.
And then slowly it's okay.
I know it was your family, but what was another important thing that you had to leave behind?
My friends. Very close with my friends.
Have you still been able to stay in contact?
Yes. I lost everything, my dress, my telephone.
I put on the newspaper to find them.
And I find them.
When you got to the UK, did you travel by plane?
By plane, yes.
What was the best and the worst? What was the best thing about the journey?
It is simple. Not the best or bad.
I think about my parents and cry, that's it.
No other thinking.
How did you feel when you arrived?
When I arrived, my two aunties living here, my mother's sister, they picked me up at the airport.
It's good to see them, but not happy.
Why Newport?
Why Newport? Because he lives in Newport, my husband.
And he was what, working?
He was working, yes. He was only 19. He was working in Tesco at that time.
And what can you remember about the first few weeks or months inside of Newport?
Very, very hard. I can't sleep, I can't talk, because everyone speaks English, I can't understand, I can't speak.
They can't understand me very, very hard. And all English people look the same.
If I see one and the other, I think he is the same.
I'm not different or anything. But it's not very good, no.
What are the challenges, whether it was languages or...?
Shopping, shopping is very hard. Going out is very hard. Doctor, other people make the other people.
And maid, maid job?
No, maid job. All day, all the housework.
Housework all day. In the morning, like half past five, half past six, and twelve o'clock night.
Did any of your friends or family join you in Newport?
Two years after my brother came here. And friends, Raheela, first friend from Pakistan.
We don't see each other much, but we still know we are here.
Yes.
And just to maintain the links, what did you do to kind of remember?
Sorry, sorry. No, no, don't worry.
I think he left the country and went to India.
He stayed hard, but he stayed alive.
Very, very true actually.
I was thinking we should run away. Me, my sister, Yasmin, and maybe Surya Devas.
Sorry.
That's alright, don't apologize.
I think sometimes it's good actually. I cry sometimes, oh my god, in my own time.
And I see that, you know, when you introduce me, I, you know, it's still...
Now I can see, you know, why I'm here. You know, when I've done the work, apart from that, if I'm honest, we just survive.
Because we can't do anything for ourselves, just for other people, all the time.
Make them happy. Nobody thinks about me.
She needs the space or happiness or anything.
I didn't go six years, I didn't see my parents. After six and a half years, I go first time.
Would you say that it was your culture that kept you strong or kept you connected, or was it something else?
How it's parents? First is parents, after children?
Yeah, you know, like obviously you didn't want to upset your parents about marriage or anything difficult.
I'm very strong when I come. I'm not afraid for anyone, anything or anyone.
But I'm not strong enough for decision, leave the house or leave the husband or leave the people.
I have no guts for like this.
And it is, as you said, with the culture, it's like people talk, isn't it?
And I always say, now, if I'm honest, with my links, with our links, there is no house who hasn't.
There are different kinds of issues. The life has completely changed.
And especially, you know, when you were saying about the culture in Pakistan, if a son will get married, it's a different daughter, will have a different life.
But here in this country, because people came in like late 50s or 60s, they were still stuck in that culture that the daughter-in-law is like a maid.
It's not that she's married our husband.
If he's only husband, maybe life is different. When it comes in the family, it's very hard.
And you just find yourself.
Five, six, seven, eight, nine people live in the same house and cooking three times a day.
And very young.
What does that look like to you now? What is the culture?
Now? 22 years I live with my in-law.
And after 15 years I live in the rent house. Now it's our house. His house, not ours.
I know I had everything.
But I have no feelings for thinking or helpless, speechless, everything.
I can't say and I can't explain anyone how I feel.
And I want to speak on the culture and traditions as well.
Is there certain efforts you've made in order to preserve?
We tried to preserve our culture.
We were from Pakistan. We have established ourselves here.
That's right. We are behind them.
We tried but we couldn't.
Like when she said extended family, loving family.
I can't give my children more time because we live in an extended family.
And what have you been able to do with your children that you're kind of proud of?
Is there certain things that you've done or shared with your children that you're proud of?
We have done a lot of things to make our children proud.
A lot of things but I neglect.
I feel I give them more time when they need me.
I'm always working in the kitchen, cleaning, visiting.
But they need me.
I say, oh, five minutes, ten minutes and they sleep.
Sometimes I think I can't sleep.
Ten days I can't sleep.
But there must be something that the children say.
That you've done a lot for them.
There's nothing.
There's no discussion.
This is the thing actually.
You have to cut a couple of parts from the recording.
How would it be?
When they go into the archive, obviously the story will be there.
But in general, it will be in a booklet.
Surely it will be 500.
In the book it will just be a text.
They're proud because they said, take a lot of things for us.
Don't go back. Don't leave me.
If I want to do anything, I get married again and leave this family.
But I didn't do it for my children.
Nothing.
The children do appreciate that she did go through a lot because of the children.
But it's a different time for them.
They've got their own stresses.
They do value.
But then she's staying with the extended family in marriage just for the sake of first the parents and then the children.
I think it's more cultural, if I'm honest.
It has nothing to do with the belief.
Religion doesn't allow a woman to suffer in silence.
It's just because we are worried about what would my parents think, what would the community say.
But that's changing.
When you ask me, what culture, we try to bring it here.
But our children do tell us, why did you suffer that much?
They always ask me why.
Why didn't you left?
My daughter, she's crying.
Like very loud.
Why you take everything and still taking?
Because they are different.
They know they have to stand for themselves but not be quiet like us.
And you said it earlier on how they speak openly from the heart.
But then they wouldn't be able to do that if it wasn't for you paving that path and doing exactly what you needed to do so they can't speak.
Because we give sacrifices, the children see that we give.
So they would say, we are pleading, pleading for our mother's life, what we have to do.
They are very upset sometimes when they talk to me, very very upset.
They come, my youngest son comes every five minutes, mom you okay, you okay.
But I have no feeling for anyone.
They are my children but not inside.
I don't know at the moment.
Is that where Age Alive, something like Age Alive has helped?
Yes, when I go regular now I can't because I have the surgery.
But I go very, a couple of hours, all days were going very good.
Because I met all friends from different cultures.
She's still been on a few groups but it's like help of other people comforting and making sure that people are you know who got health, that they are safe.
This is something they look after actually us.
How did you become involved in Age Alive?
I think because, one of the things was because the group I was running closed.
Yes, we go regularly.
And Age Alive started picking up actually because they were dying down basically.
The group was set up by Leanne Taylor from Quinty's first.
I was involved with her but then she left, somebody else employed and more or less it was.
That's when you started.
I go regular in Age Alive.
Not for two, three years, not regular but before that.
What does it mean to you as well?
Very good, very helpful.
My mind is very, like exercise classes and now she's coming for meditation.
It's very helpful, very good.
I finish my, like when I come regular I take off my medicine, like depression.
Very good, yes.
And how do you think that supports Asian, black or other minority or majority groups over 50s?
Very good, very nice.
I talk to everyone, I don't mind, I talk to everyone.
Why is that important?
For peace of mind, yes.
I love to go out all the time but now I'm with health problems.
She wasn't going to come actually so I had to come yesterday.
She asked me a lot of times, she said no, no, she said no come, she asked you.
When he asked I said okay, I didn't say do anything for her.
And you have to share, it's not all that she's doing, it's just that she wants to do the story.
It is very important if I'm honest actually, you know for Age Alive because people do comfort each other.
And when Yasmin comes, despite she is, this is one of her qualities, she doesn't see inside, she may be broken if I'm honest.
But she does make cracks, leaving jokes and smile and always she's done that actually.
Sometimes people can't see their qualities, very loving, caring, did her best.
As a woman sometimes we don't value ourselves, being patient.
It's not only about belief obviously, she's religious but she's open minded as well.
Very generous, it doesn't have to be a bad thing.
She's religious but she's open minded as well.
Very generous, it doesn't have to be, if she will help, it doesn't have to be a Muslim person, she has to help anybody in crisis.
Even if she's not working and she says wherever disaster is she'll pay the money actually.
Because it makes some difference to other people, appreciating what we have but helping others.
As a woman sometimes we don't like praise, we feel sometimes embarrassed when other people tell us this is the good quality.
And she is when she comes and very helpful, when her health was good.
And we do miss her when she doesn't come.
This is helpful so thank you so much for coming and accepting the invitation to come and share because it's really powerful and really important to hear just your story.
Thank you.
I think our message will be actually collective.
You can always add that message actually.
Collective is the one thing that...